Our Sun is considered an average star, yet the energy from the Sun that reaches the Earth
is thousands of times the world's total energy use.
With our unated eyes we might see about 3,000 stars on a dark night, many in a fuzzy band.
The Milky Way Galaxy, where our Sun is just one of perhaps 200 to 400 billion stars.
Astronomers think the Milky Way Galaxy is clustered together with around 100,000 large galaxies
in a massive structure called a supercluster.
But together with an estimated 2 trillion galaxies, make up the known physical universe.
Countless stars spread over unfathomable distances, releasing immense amounts of energy
may be impossible to grasp for us, but not for Jehovah.
He counts the number of the stars, he calls all of them by name.
Our Lord is great and is mighty in power.
Millions of cubic meters of water circulates continually around our planet.
Near the poles water that is colder, saltier and denser sinks, creating a flow almost 100 times
that of the Amazon River.
This drives a massive circulation of water that may take 1,000 years to complete.
The global ocean conveyor belt.
This enormous system distributes heat, which helps to stabilize the weather and transports
great quantities of nutrients around the world.
So that life may flourish in abundance.
Jehovah set these mechanisms in motion and understands them perfectly.
You rule over the raging of the sea when its waves surge you calm.
Trees can grow very strong and withstand powerful forces.
But if they didn't decompose after they die, trees and leaves would pile up with their
nutrients locked away inside.
Yet they do decompose.
How?
Most animals cannot eat fallen wood and leaves.
But fungi can, they break down the dead plant tissues, making them softer, beetles and
termites, bore through the wood exposing more surface area and spreading the fungi inside,
which soften it further so that other insects can enjoy the feast.
Earthworms aerate the soil and pull nutrients down where they can be used by other plants.
Decomposes have been called the unsung heroes of the natural world.
They recycle organic matter so that it is available to support new life.
Through this process, Jehovah made it possible for us to enjoy Earth's lush beauty, generation
after generation.
But the fields and everything in them rejoice at the same time that all the trees of the
forest shout joyfully.
Hale, though it is made of ice, it is very different from snow.
Hale usually forms in warm weather when turbulent air produces thunderstorms with powerful
updrafts.
These updrafts can pull a piece of dust or ice high into the cloud where water freezes
around it.
Each trip up into the cloud adds a layer of ice and weight.
Until it becomes a hail stone that is heavy enough to fall, hail storms can be powerfully
destructive.
One deadly storm dropped hail stones weighing more than one kilogram each.
Jehovah used Hale to demonstrate his power and defend his people, such as during the
seventh plague against Egypt.
When Joshua fought the Amorites, Jehovah caused a great hail storm and more Amorites died
from the hail stones done in battle.
Hale is also mentioned among the elements Jehovah will use in the future against those
who attack his people.
Have you seen the storehouses of the Hale which I have reserved for the day of battle
and war?
The largest animal alive on earth today is also the largest that has ever lived.
The blue whale.
Blue whales can grow to be over 30 meters long and weigh up to 180 tons.
Its heart alone may weigh several hundred kilograms.
How does such a large creature find enough to eat?
The blue whale migrates great distances to find tiny crustaceans known as krill.
When a blue whale finds a school of krill, it accelerates towards the krill.
Opens its giant mouth.
They main gulf hundreds of kilograms of krill with each lunge, amounting to several
tons per day.
Blue whales eat a lot.
Yet, Jehovah provides for them and he will provide for us.
There is the sea, so great and wide, teeming with countless living things, both small and
great.
Our bones are amazing.
They support our bodies, protect our organs and store almost all of the bodies calcium,
a mineral essential for our health.
For their weight, bones are very strong.
The feats of a track and field jumper may experience forces of several times his body
weight.
The bones can compress and bend, but sometimes they break.
A fractured bone can heal well, if properly said.
Inflenation brings organic building blocks to the area and soft tissue grows between the
broken pieces.
The soft tissue is replaced with harder tissue.
The body replaces the harder tissue with new bone, until the repair is complete.
In children, the brake may heal without leaving a trace.
Jehovah gave every bone in our body this incredible ability to heal.
I praise you because in an awe-inspiring way, I am wonderfully made.